.TH CANCONF 1 "2026-04-22" "canconf 0.3.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
canconf \- reconfigure all SocketCAN / CAN\-FD interfaces in one shot
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B canconf
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ SPEC ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B canconf
discovers every CAN interface on the host (any net device whose ARPHRD type is
CAN, i.e.
.BR can* ,
.BR vcan* ,
.BR slcan* )
and applies the same configuration to all of them (or to the subset given via
.BR \-\-ifaces ).
Each run takes the interfaces down, applies the requested parameters, and
brings them back up. If not already root,
.B canconf
re\-executes itself under
.BR sudo (8).
.SH SPEC
.TP
.B BITRATE
Classic CAN at the given nominal bitrate, e.g. \fB500k\fR, \fB1M\fR, \fB125000\fR.
.TP
.B BITRATE/DBITRATE
CAN\-FD with a nominal and a data bitrate, e.g. \fB500k/2M\fR.
.TP
.B BITRATE[/DBITRATE]@SP[/DSP]
Optional sample points appended after
.BR @ ,
e.g. \fB500k/2M@0.875/0.75\fR.
.TP
.B off \fR|\fR down
Bring all selected interfaces down.
.TP
.B up
Bring all selected interfaces up without reconfiguring.
.TP
.B bitrates
Print per\-interface introspection: driver, reference clock, achievable
bitrate envelope (derived from
.BR bittiming_const ),
the standard CAN bitrates that fall within it, and \- for FD\-capable hardware
\- the same for the data bitrate.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-ifaces " " \fILIST\fR
Comma\-separated list of interfaces. Default: every CAN interface.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-restart\-ms " " \fIN\fR
Enable automatic restart on bus\-off after N milliseconds.
.TP
.B \-\-listen\-only
Enable listen\-only mode.
.TP
.B \-\-loopback
Enable loopback mode.
.TP
.B \-\-one\-shot
Enable one\-shot mode.
.TP
.B \-\-berr
Enable bus error reporting.
.TP
.BR \-\-term " " \fIOHM\fR
Set the termination resistor value (requires driver support).
.TP
.BR \-\-txqueuelen " " \fIN\fR
Override the tx queue length. Default: 10000.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-dry\-run
Print the
.BR ip (8)
commands that would run; do not execute them.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Print each
.BR ip (8)
command as it runs.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress the post\-apply status dump.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI colour in the status output. Also respects the
.B NO_COLOR
and
.B FORCE_COLOR
environment variables.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
No CAN interfaces found, or at least one interface failed to configure. If
multiple interfaces share a bus, a warning is printed to stderr listing the
interfaces that succeeded and those that failed; other interfaces are not
aborted because of a single failure.
.TP
.B 2
Invalid spec. Bitrates below 10 kbit/s are rejected as probable typos — if you
typed
.B canconf 800
you almost certainly meant
.BR "canconf 800k" ;
a hint suggesting the
.B k
suffix is printed.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Show status of all CAN interfaces:
.B canconf
.TP
Configure every CAN interface to 500 kbit/s classic CAN:
.B canconf 500k
.TP
Configure CAN\-FD at 500k nominal / 2M data with sample points:
.B canconf 500k/2M@0.875/0.75
.TP
Restrict to two interfaces, enable auto\-restart:
.B canconf 1M \-i can0,can1 \-r 100
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ip\-link (8),
.BR candump (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Michael Lauer <mickey@vanille-media.de>
