.TH CANMON 1 "2026-04-25" "canmon 0.3.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
canmon \- monitor SocketCAN / CAN\-FD interface state, configuration, and bit\-error rate
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B canmon
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B canmon
polls every CAN interface on the host (or the subset given via
.BR \-\-ifaces )
at a configurable interval and tracks the CAN error state, bitrate, and per\-second
error deltas.
.PP
By default the current state of every selected interface is printed once at
startup,
.B canmon
keeps discovering CAN interfaces that appear later, and then stays silent,
emitting a new row only when something actually changes: a state
transition, a bittiming change, an auto\-restart, or a tick in which the CAN
controller bit\-error rate exceeds
.BR \-\-err\-rate .
Use
.B \-\-verbose
to force a row per interface per tick instead.
.PP
All data comes from
.BR ip (8)
(via the
.B \-j \-details \-statistics
options) and
.B /sys/class/net
— no root required, no traffic interference, no dependency on
.BR berr\-reporting (8).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-ifaces " " \fILIST\fR
Comma\-separated list of interfaces. Default: every CAN interface.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-rate " " \fISECONDS\fR
Tick interval. Default: 1.0.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-err\-rate " " \fIN\fR
Flag ticks in which the CAN controller bit\-error counter
.RB ( info_xstats.bus_error )
advances by more than
.I N
per second. Default: 1.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-once
Print the initial snapshot and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Emit a row every tick, not just on change.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI colour output. Colour is auto\-enabled on TTYs and disabled on
pipes. The
.B NO_COLOR
environment variable also disables it;
.B FORCE_COLOR
forces it on.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.SH OUTPUT
Columns:
.TP
.B TIME
Local wall\-clock time of the tick (HH:MM:SS).
.TP
.B IFACE
Interface name.
.TP
.B STATE
CAN error state:
.BR ERROR\-ACTIVE ,
.BR ERROR\-WARNING ,
.BR ERROR\-PASSIVE ,
or
.BR BUS\-OFF .
If a selected interface is absent from
.BR ip (8)
output for a poll, this column shows
.BR MISSING .
If the link is present but the CAN\-specific state block is absent, it shows
.BR NO\-CAN\-DATA .
.TP
.B BITRATE
Nominal bitrate, or nominal/data for CAN\-FD.
.TP
.B "Δerr/s"
Frame\-level rx+tx error delta per second (from
.BR stats64 ).
.TP
.B "Δbus/s"
CAN controller bit\-error delta per second (from
.BR info_xstats.bus_error ).
.TP
.B restarts
Running total of driver\-initiated auto\-restarts after bus\-off (requires
.B restart\-ms
to be non\-zero at configure time).
.TP
.B notes
Pipe\-separated event tags:
.B STATE old → new
on error\-state transition;
.B CONFIG old → new
on bittiming change;
.B RESTART #N
on auto\-restart;
.B BIT\-ERRORS N/s > T/s
when the threshold is breached.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default 1 Hz monitor of all interfaces:
.B canmon
.TP
Sub\-second monitor, flag anything above 5 bit\-errors/sec:
.B canmon \-r 0.5 \-t 5
.TP
Verbose (tick every interval), single interface:
.B canmon \-v \-i can0
.TP
Snapshot current state of can0 and exit:
.B canmon \-o \-i can0
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR canconf (1),
.BR ip\-link (8),
.BR candump (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Michael Lauer <mickey@vanille-media.de>
