.TH CANTALK 1 "2026-04-26" "cantalk 0.4.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cantalk \- tiny REPL for sending and receiving CAN messages over SocketCAN
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cantalk
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I IFACE
.RI [ ARBITRATION ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cantalk
opens a CAN socket on
.I IFACE
and exposes a small interactive prompt for setting an arbitration pair
.RI ( tx / rx )
and exchanging hex payloads with an ECU. By default it speaks ISOTP (ISO 15765\-2)
via the kernel
.B can\-isotp
module \- segmentation, flow control, and reassembly are handled transparently.
With
.B \-\-raw
each typed payload becomes a single classic CAN frame and any matching frames
seen during the response window are printed.
.PP
On a TTY the prompt is anchored to the bottom of the terminal in a
three-line frame: a top rule with iface, mode, arbitration, padding, and
timeout; the input line carrying the
.B \(rA
prompt; and a bottom rule with hints (\fB:help\fR, \fB\(ua\(da\fR history,
\fBCtrl-C\fR exit). The request/response log scrolls independently above
this frame. Pass
.B \-\-plain
(or pipe stdin) to fall back to a one-prompt-per-line REPL without the
scroll region.
.PP
The last arbitration pair set during a session is persisted per interface
to
.I $XDG_STATE_HOME/cantalk/state.json
and automatically restored next time
.B cantalk
opens that interface without an explicit arbitration argument. CLI
arguments always override the saved value.
.PP
The interaction model intentionally mirrors
.B ecuconnect\-tool term
from Swift\-CANyonero: a single colon prefix to set arbitration, bare hex to send,
.BR quit / Ctrl\-C / Ctrl\-D
to exit.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I IFACE
The CAN interface to use, e.g.
.BR can0 ", " vcan0 ". "
The interface must already be configured and up; use
.BR canconf (1)
for that.
.TP
.I ARBITRATION
Optional pre\-set arbitration:
.B TX
or
.BR TX,RX .
If only TX is given (and the mode is ISOTP), RX is auto\-derived: TX+8 for
11\-bit IDs, source/target swap for 29\-bit
.B 18DA<target><source>
J1939\-style physical addressing.
.SH REPL COMMANDS
.TP
.B :TX
Set TX, derive RX (ISOTP only).
.TP
.B :TX,RX
Set TX and RX explicitly. Hex; 11\-bit if value \(<= 0x7FF, else 29\-bit.
.TP
.B :info
Show interface, mode, arbitration, timeout.
.TP
.B :help
Show the in\-REPL command list.
.TP
.B HEX...
Bare hex bytes \- spaces, ":" and "," are ignored. Sends one ISOTP message
or one raw CAN frame.
.TP
.B quit
Exit. Ctrl\-D works too.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-raw
Use raw CAN sockets instead of ISOTP. Each payload is sent as a single
8\-byte CAN frame; longer payloads are rejected.
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-timeout " " \fISECONDS\fR
Response timeout. Default: 2.0. In raw mode the deadline is extended by 250 ms
after each received frame so multi\-frame replies on the same bus are caught.
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-pad " " \fIHEX\fR
Pad every CAN frame to 8 bytes with this byte. Default:
.BR AA
(common ECU expectation). Pass
.B none
to disable padding (kernel/driver default). Applies in both ISOTP and
raw modes; in ISOTP mode it sets
.B txpad_content
and
.B rxpad_content
on the kernel
.BR can\-isotp
socket. The legacy long form
.B \-\-padding
is still accepted.
.TP
.B \-\-plain
Disable the bottom-anchored TUI; use a simple line-by-line REPL instead.
The TUI is automatically disabled when stdin or stdout isn't a TTY, or when
.B TERM
is unset or
.BR dumb .
.TP
.B \-\-no\-color
Disable ANSI colour. Also respects
.B NO_COLOR
and
.BR FORCE_COLOR .
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Show help and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Clean exit (quit / Ctrl\-D).
.TP
.B 1
Cannot bind to the requested interface (e.g. interface down, missing privileges).
.TP
.B 2
Bad command\-line argument (no
.IR IFACE ,
malformed arbitration, bad padding).
.SH PRIVILEGES
Opening AF_CAN sockets requires
.B CAP_NET_RAW
or root. Unlike
.BR canconf (1),
.B cantalk
does not self\-elevate; run it under
.BR sudo (8)
or grant the binary
.B CAP_NET_RAW
out\-of\-band if you prefer.
.SH FILES
.TP
.IR $XDG_STATE_HOME/cantalk/history " (default " ~/.local/state/cantalk/history ")"
Plain text command history, capped at 1000 lines.
.TP
.IR $XDG_STATE_HOME/cantalk/state.json " (default " ~/.local/state/cantalk/state.json ")"
Per-interface arbitration: a JSON object keyed by iface name, each value
having
.B tx
and
.B rx
hex strings. Updated on exit when an arbitration was set during the
session.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Open an ISOTP REPL on can0 and ask the engine ECU for its VIN:
.EX
$ cantalk can0 7E0,7E8
> 0902
.EE
.TP
Raw\-CAN REPL on vcan0, accept all reply IDs, 500 ms response window:
.EX
$ cantalk vcan0 7DF --raw -t 0.5
.EE
.TP
Override the default 0xAA padding with 0xCC (common on VAG/Bosch ECUs):
.EX
$ cantalk can0 7E0,7E8 -p CC
.EE
.TP
Disable padding entirely (DLC reflects actual payload length):
.EX
$ cantalk can0 7E0,7E8 --pad none
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR canconf (1),
.BR canmon (1),
.BR ip\-link (8),
.BR candump (1),
.BR cansend (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Dr. Michael Lauer <mickey@vanille-media.de>
